In this lecture, you'll learn about Equal Cost Multi Path (ECMP). If multiple paths to a destination network
have an equal metric, the router will enter all of those paths into the routing table,
and it will load balance the outbound traffic to that destination network over those available multiple
equal cost paths. And all routing protocols, all your IGPs, will perform Equal Cost Multi Path by default.
So RIP will do it,
IS-IS, EIGRP, OSPF, they will all do equal cost multi path by default. Meaning, if they learn multiple
paths to get to the same destination and those paths have got the same cost and it's the best path, it
will put them all in routing table and load balance across all of those paths. So they can all do Equal
Cost Multi Path, EIGRP is the only routing protocol that can do Unequal Cost Multi Path.
So they'll all do Equal Cost Multi Path by default including EIGRP, EIGRP will not do Unequal Cost
to load balancing by default but it can do it if you manually configure it to do so. So looking at our
example here, we have got R1 on the right, we've got R4 on the left.
The example is going to take a look at how R4 is going to get to the 10.0.1.0
/24 network behind R1.
If you look in our example topology, all of the links are in the same bandwidth. They're all 100 megabits
per second and it has to go through 1, 2, 3, 100 megabit lengths along the top path and also 1, 2, 3
100 megabit links along the bottom path.
So all of our different routing protocols would see these two paths, top and bottom, as being an Equal
Cost Paths.
So in that case R4 will install two routes into the routing table for the 10.0.1.0/24 network.
The same will happen for the 10.0.2.0/24 network in this example as well.
Half the traffic will take path R4 to R3 to R2 to R1, and the other half will
take the path R4 to R5 to R6 to R1.
You can also achieve load balancing with static routes as well. To do that, just configure two different
static routes both for the exact same subnet and the same subnet mask that put in two different next hops.
Again, that will install two different routes into the routing table and traffic will be load balanced over both
of them. You can have more than two routes if you wanted to. If you put in three routes, it would load balance
over all three. Again, something that we covered in the earlier lecture when we looked at load balancing
for static routing,
this is the same for our IGP routing protocols as well, the traffic is not going to be load
balanced the round robin for the same flow. Meaning, if you've got one particular source host that's talking
to a web server, for example, its traffic for that one flow is not going to go through the first packet,
R1, the second packet, R2, the third packet, R3, and so on. If it gets a load balance to R1,
all traffic for a single flow will go through the same router, R1, for our example. But if you've
got a different source host talking to maybe a different destination, that will be load balanced
onto a different link. So the same flow always goes through the same router, but different flows will get load
balanced through the different routers.
The reason it does this, is we don't want packets for the same flow going over different paths because
what could cause the packets to arrive out of order if there's is a longer delay on one path than there is on the other.
And that can cause some applications to fail.
So single flow always goes over the same path.
Okay, so that was our Equal Cost Multi Path.
In the next lecture, we'll have a look at a lab example.